doc: Bluetooth: Documentation overhaul (#14163)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: doc/guides/bluetooth/bluetooth-arch.rst

.. _bluetooth-arch:

Bluetooth Stack Architecture
############################

Overview
********

This page describes the software architecture of Zephyr's Bluetooth protocol
stack. 

.. note::
   Zephyr supports mainly Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE), the low-power
   version of the Bluetooth specification, although it also has limited support
   for portions of the BR/EDR Host. Throughout this architecture document we
   use BLE interchangably for Bluetooth except when noted.

.. _bluetooth-layers:

BLE Layers
==========

There are 3 main layers that together constitute a full Bluetooth Low Enery
protocol stack:

* **Host**: This layer sits right below the application, and it is comprised of
  the multiple (non real-time) network and transport protocols enabling
  applications to communicate with peer devices in a standard and interoperable
  way

> * **Controller**: The Controller implements either the Link Layer (LE LL), the

Author: Fixed thanks

  low-level, real-time protocol which provides, in conjunction with the Radio
  Hardware, standard interoperable over the air communication. The LL schedules
  packet reception and transmission, guarantees the delivery of data, and
  handles all the LL control procedures
* **Radio Hardware**: The required analog and digital baseband functional blocks
  that permit the Link Layer firmware to send and receive in the 2.4GHz band of
  the spectrum

.. _bluetooth-hci:

Host Controller Interface
=========================

> The Bluetooth Specification describes the format in which a Host must

Author: Yep, done thanks.

  Bluetooth specification does not specify how HCI is implemented in this
  single-chip configuration and so how HCI commands, events and data flows between
  the two can be implementation-specific. The Zephyr OS supports this
  configuration on Nordic Semiconductor ICs, for those applications and designs
  that require a small footprint and the lowest possible power consumption, since
  everything runs on a single IC
* **Dual-chip configuration**: Using two separate ICs,
  one running the Application and the Host, and a second one with the Controller
  and the Radio Hardware. This is sometimes also called a connectivity-chip
  configuration. This configuration allows for a wider variety of combinations of
  Hosts when using the Zephyr OS as a Controller. Since HCI ensures
  interoperability among Host and Controller implementations, including of course
  Zephyr’s very own BLE Host and Controller, users of the Zephyr Controller can
  choose to use whatever Host running on any platform they prefer. For example,
  the host can be the Linux BLE Host stack (BlueZ) running on any processor
  capable of supporting Linux. The Host processor may also run Zephyr and the

>   Zephyr OS BLE Host.

Reviewer: Might want to mention here the case of combining Zephyr host with non-Zephyr controller, e.g. the case with qemu or native posix using your PC's internal Bluetooth adapter.

Author: Added thanks

.. _bluetooth-build-types:

Build Types
===========

The Zephyr software stack as an RTOS is highly configurable, and in particular,
the BLE subsystem can be configured in multiple ways during the build process to
include only the features and layers that are required to reduce RAM and ROM
footprint as well as power consumption. Here’s a short list of the different
BLE-enabled builds that can be produced from the Zephyr project codebase:

* **Controller-only build**: When built as a BLE Controller, Zephyr project

>   contains the Link Layer and a special application (

Author: Done thanks

can send to a Controller and the events that it can expect in return, and also
the format for user and protocol data that needs to go over the air. The HCI
ensures that different Host and Controller implementations can communicate
in a standard way making it possible to combine Hosts and Controllers from
different vendors.

.. _bluetooth-configs:

Configurations
==============

The three separate layers of the protocol and the standardized interface make
it possible to implement the Host and Controller on different platforms. The two
following typical configurations are commonly used:

* **Single-chip configuration**: In this configuration, a single microcontroller
  contains all three layers and the application itself. This can also be called a
  system-on-chip (SoC) implementation. In this case the BLE Host and the BLE
  Controller communicate directly through function calls and queues in RAM. The
  Bluetooth specification does not specify how HCI is implemented in this
  single-chip configuration and so how HCI commands, events and data flows between
  the two can be implementation-specific. The Zephyr OS supports this

>   configuration on Nordic Semiconductor ICs, for those applications and designs

Author: Yes, I agree. I will rework that

>   configuration on Nordic Semiconductor ICs, for those applications and designs

Author: Done

        Encryption and authentication using the LE Secure Connections
        feature available since Bluetooth 4.2.

.. note::
  Mesh has its own security solution through a process called
  provisioning. It follows a similar procedure as pairing, but is done
  using separate mesh-specific APIs.

L2CAP
=====

L2CAP layer enables connection-oriented channels which can be enable with the
configuration option: :option:`CONFIG_BT_L2CAP_DYNAMIC_CHANNEL`. This channels
support segmentation and reassembly transparently, they also support credit
based flow control making it suitable for data streams.

Channels instaces are represented by the :cpp:class:`bt_l2cap_chan` struct which
contains the callbacks in the :cpp:class:`bt_l2cap_chan_ops` struct to inform
when the channel has been connected, disconnected or when the encryption has
changed.
In addition to that it also contains the ``recv`` callback which is called
whenever an incoming data has been received. Data received this way can be
marked as processed by returning 0 or using
:cpp:func:`bt_l2cap_chan_recv_complete` API if processing is asynchronous.

.. note::
  The ``recv`` callback is called directly from RX Thread thus it is not

>   allowed to block.

Reviewer: This isn't completely true. You can (and should) block for small periods of time if it simplifies the code. This is e.g. why it's possible to do `bt_hci_cmd_send_sync()` from within the RX thread.

Reviewer: So I'd change this to something like:

"The recv callback is called from the RX thread, so long blocking operations should be avoided and all blocking operations which rely on the RX thread itself must not be done since it would result in a deadlock."

Reviewer 2: I will update the text, but in case of bt_l2cap_chan.recv it is a callback on the application, well appart from fixed channels, so I guess it is useful to inform in what context they will get called.

        Declares a Characteristic Extended Properties.

    :cpp:func:`BT_GATT_CUD`
        Declares a Characteristic User Format.

Each attribute contain a ``uuid``, which describes their type, a ``read``
callback, a ``write`` callback and a set of permission. Both read and write
callbacks can be set to NULL if the attribute permission don't allow their
respective operations.

.. note::
  Attribute ``read`` and ``write`` callbacks are called directly from RX Thread
  thus they are not allowed to block.

Attribute value changes can be notified using :cpp:func:`bt_gatt_notify` API,
alternatively there is :cpp:func:`bt_gatt_notify_cb` where is is possible to
pass a callback to be called when it is necessary to know the exact instant when
the data has been transmitted over the air. Indications are supported by
:cpp:func:`bt_gatt_indicate` API.

Client procedures can be enabled with the configuration option:
:option:`CONFIG_BT_GATT_CLIENT`

Discover procedures can be initiated with the use of
:cpp:func:`bt_gatt_discover` API which takes the
:cpp:class:`bt_gatt_dicover_params` struct which describes the type of
discovery. The parameters also serves as a filter when setting the ``uuid``

> field only attributes which matches will be discovered, by contranst setting it

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
field only attributes which matches will be discovered. In contrast, setting it
```

> to NULL makes all attributes to be discovered.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
to NULL allows all attributes to be discovered.
```

being triggered for the same attribute. Subscriptions can be removed with use of
:cpp:func:`bt_gatt_unsubscribe()` API.

.. note::
  When subscriptions are removed ``notify`` callback is called with the data
  set to NULL.

Mesh
====

Mesh is a little bit special when it comes to the needed GAP roles. By
default, mesh requires both observer and broadcaster role to be enabled.
If the optional GATT Proxy feature is desired, then peripheral role
should also be enabled.

Peristent storage
=================

The Bluetooth host stack uses the settings subsystem to implement
persistent storage to flash. This requires the presence of a flash
driver and a designated "storage" partition on flash. A typical set of
configuration options needed will look something like the following:

  .. code-block:: none

    CONFIG_BT_SETTINGS=y
    CONFIG_FLASH=y
    CONFIG_FLASH_PAGE_LAYOUT=y
    CONFIG_FLASH_MAP=y
    CONFIG_FCB=y
    CONFIG_SETTINGS=y
    CONFIG_SETTINGS_FCB=y

Once enabled, it is the responsibility of the application to call
settings_load() after having initialized Bluetooth (using the
bt_enable() API).

BLE Controller
**************

Standard
========

> 

Reviewer 3: Work in progress, right?

Author: Yep, will be a follow-up PR
